---
layout: post
title:  "Habits 5: Seek First to Understand, Then To be Understood"
categories: seven-habits
---

Just like how you would never take prescriptions from a doctor before they reach an informed diagnosis, it is also impractical to offer an advice to someone without understanding their issues. When it comes to interpersonal relationships, the principle is to seek first to understand, then to be understood. 

Communication is the most important skill in our lives. However, we more than often are trained on the personality ethic of techniques, truncated from the character base that is vital to authenticity in interpersonal understanding. There is no reasonable expectation for anyone to open up when they sense manipulation, causticity and distrust: the Emotional Bank Account must have a positive balance. People intrinsically want to open up, but not until they comfortably withdraw their natural defensive stance. 

The hardest component of communication is to listen, for which there are four levels: we can choose to 1) ignore, where we choose not to listen at all, 2) pretend, where we react with non-consequential acknowledgements without development of material appreciation of the conversion, 3) be selective, where we attempt to comprehend the interactions by only paying attention to subjectively selected keywords, as if the other party were a preschool child, 4) be attentive, where we pay attention and assimilate every single word. But, the highest and only effective mode of listening, is an extra 5) *empathic listening*, where we see from others’ perspectives and understand their areas of concerns, infused with our own reflection and appreciation, far beyond the apparent verbiage. Empathic listening is to listen for behaviors and emotions, not words or expressions. 

It is *empathic listening* that truly creates an atmosphere of psychological air that enables effective communication - no projection of autobiography is intended, and no intents are assumed. Instead we listen to understand their behaviors and emotions. *Empathic listening* makes tremendous deposit into the Emotional Bank Account when perceived as truthful, and much withdrawal when considered deceptive and manipulative. It takes patience, time, and courage to communicate empathetically because it requires us lower our defense, opening up for being influenced. 

*Empathic listening* requires suppression of autobiographical responses: these responses are spontaneous because our life (especially, educational) experiences have constantly emphasized judgments subject to autobiographical criteria. Autobiographical responses can manifest in four ways: we 1) evaluate, where we either agree or disagree, 2) probe, where we ask questions with predetermined responses relative to our own frame of references, 3) advise, where we offer counsel based on our own experiences, and 4) interpret, where we project others’ motivations and behaviors into our own. This pattern of conversation is never effective despite how well-intended it can be.  

To develop *empathic listening* requires typically four stages once we move past autobiographical responses: we can 1) mimic content, which minimally acknowledges that we are active listening but may appear insulting without prior establishment of a character base, 2) rephrase the content, which sees positive albeit limited improvements in conversational effectiveness, 3) reflect feelings, and 4) reflect feelings and rephrase the content. The last and highest form of empathic listening can allow transactional conversational opportunities to become transformational, when accompanied with fluid shift between empathy support and logical counsel, subject to the level of emotional expression. 