---
layout: post
title:  "Habits 1: Be Proactive"
categories: seven-habits
---
Human possess this unique consciousness that we phrase as self-awareness. It allow us to criticize the the processes of thinking themselves beyond their mere outcome, manifested as our thoughts. This unique trait allows us to examine how we see ourselves, and how others see themselves: our appreciation of others will otherwise always be conditioned on our own paradigmatic biases.
 A social mirror presents a projective reflection of ourselves through societal interactions. We acknowledge the tremendous power that such commentary can wield, yet completely reject any notion of their determinism in shaping ourselves. Be it generic, psychic, or environmental, any widely accepted theories around determinism about how our responses are fully conditioned by external stimuli are untrue. Between stimulus and response, man has the freedom to choose: we have self-awareness, conscience, imagination, and independent will, that are solely under our control and can be leveraged by us to interpret the stimuli proactively and choose the responses that we desire. 
The habit of proactivity is the most basic habit of a highly effective person. Such a person recognizes our responsibility and behaves in a way compatible with their conscious choice, based on their values, rather than a product of their conditions, based on feelings. The opposite, would be where we choose to reactively empower what controls us. A proactive person disregards weather because they modulate their own climate around themselves. No one can hurt us without our consents. The attitudinal value supercedes its experiential and creative counterparts, and is the highest value of all because that value dictates how we create or respond to experiences of ours. 
To be proactive is to take the initiative. Often times we place ourselves in irresponsible positions, claiming that our misery and misfortune are controlled by elements beyond our reach, and there is nothing else we could do other than sit and wait. Think Resourcefulness and Initiative. Think Perspective. However difficult the situations may be, there are paths where we can project success by taking actions, instead of facing the inevitable destiny of being acted upon. We have the power to choose proactively.
Our language is an excellent apparatus through which we can observe for our proactivity or passivity - notions such as I have to suggests that we have no control, whereas everything that we claim to have to achieve is what we choose to do or be subconsciously, decoupled from external stimuli. Any template is untrue when it resembles: I am not responsible, not able to choose my response. In reality, we never have to, but we can choose to do or be, consciously, for the better. 
Another excellent way to examine our self-awareness and proactivity is frame our matters as a circle of concerns, within which there lays a circle of influence. A proactive person understands to spend our energy and time on the circle of influence, on what we can control, to steer our lives; continued self-development allows us expand that circle of influence through our values to cover more of the concerns. A reactive person powerlessly focuses on the circle of concern and blames others, reducing their circle of influence. Some circumstances will see one’s influence greater than concerns, but that merely reflects a emotional myopia, a reactive lifestyle focused on the circle of concerns.
At the core of the circle of influence, it is about the free will to act, and the responsibility to its consequences. It is also about making promises and delivering on them. In that circle, we can choose to be the change that we want to see, be that transitional person that shatters any painful past. 
