---
layout: post
title:  "Habits 3: Put First Things First"
categories: seven-habits
---
Often we speak of priorities and how tasks can be arranged so and executed: earlier generations of time management systems have utilized checklists, calendars, with values infused, tasks pinned to the minutes and by the days. However, when it comes to different time horizons, our classic interpretation of priorities may no longer be applicable, and our schedules set forth as such could be counterproductive. 

Time management is truly the management of ourselves. It is a balancing act between production and production capacity. We define two axes: important (vs. not) and urgent (vs. not), which create four quadrants under which our tasks can fall into. It then becomes evident that we are attracted by those *neither urgent nor important* (IV), as they typically offer pleasure with the least resistances; it should also be apparent that the tasks that are *both urgent and important* (I) desire our immediate attention. Some activities are *urgent but not important* (III), such as some chitchats or phone calls, which offer more feeling of being victimized as being out of focus than any benefits. 

It is those that are important but not urgent (II) that truly differentiate. They are not as attractive due to apparent lack of urgency, but their execution in the longevity of time enables the establishment of new production capacity, the recognition of new opportunities, and the building of new relationships. They help reduce the intensity of crises that demand our urgent and immediate attention. They help us say “No”, while principally diverting our time otherwise spent on excessive pleasantries (not urgent and not important) here for something that accumulative to longer-term impact. 

Those wishing to take advantage of the Quadrant II need to meet six important criteria: **coherence**, which manifests as harmony between activities and personal missions at different time horizons, **balance**, which achieves a reasonable proportionality among various personal identities, **focus** (commitment), which bests translates to a weekly basis to schedule our lives around, **people**, which demand a effectiveness-orientated ways of thinking instead of efficiency, **flexibility**, which offers room to maneuver on the schedule, and **portability**, which enables us to check on the schedule easily. 

To meet the criteria set forth above, one can start by identifying the personal roles, their respective ultimate objectives, as well as their projections into the next week. Blocks can be set in a recurring manner on a weekly basis to set time for Quadrant II activities that help fulfill those projections. A scheduled week offers a peace of mind that we have committed to accomplish these activities, as well as a visualizable proof that there exists plenty of remaining time slots during which we could indulge in pleasantries. This weekly organization can be coupled with daily adjustments, such that we develop a continuum on priorities across different quadrants and their associated flexibility. 

The latest generation of time management as described here is superior because: it is conscience-directed and principle-centered, which contextualizes the notion of “importance”; it clarifies the unique personal mission towards the long term; it balances the expenditure of times via personal roles; and, it offers a balanced time span to be compatible with activities of different time horizons. 

All that said, when it comes to the people, we think effectiveness, not efficiency. Effectiveness with people means delegation: a gofer delegation tells others what to do, whereas a stewardship delegation is established on a mutual understanding of desired results, guidelines, resources, accountability, and consequences, and represents a higher form of delegation. 
