---
layout: post
title:  "Habits 3: Put First Things First"
categories: seven-habits
---

## Principles of Interpersonal Leadership

Win-Lose is prevalent in our competitive society, but the essence is never competitiveness, but the low amount of trust. Lose-Win, on the other hand, is a weak position because it conditions personal fulfillment on popularity or public acceptance. Lose-Lose is the manifestation of dependence since a person feeds on others’ misery. Win is where people are not concerned with others. Win-Win is the only real alternative in the long run, whereas the best short-term choice could depend on the specific situations. Win-Win or No Deal serves as a higher form of Win-Win, to attempt for alignment of expectations sooner than being disillusioned further downstream. 

Think Win-Win is the habit of interpersonal leadership. It takes the unique human endowments of self-awareness, imagination, conscience, and independent will. It embraces five interdependent dimensions of life, with the first of which being character. Character is 1) integrity, which translates to fulfillment of promises and commitments, 2) maturity, which is the balance between courage and consideration - it takes consideration (empathy) to enable the other side to win, and it takes courage to want to win ourselves - Win-Win demands both qualities, and 3) Abundance Mentality, which contrasts Scarcity Mentality, and states that there is plenty for everyone - an outward projection of personal worth the sense of security. Such a character offers genuineness that goes beyond technique.

The second dimension is Relationships. The trust, the balance in the Emotional Bank Account, are the basis of Win-Win. This basis facilitates open discussions and synergistic solutions. In such a relationship, interpersonal leadership can be transformational, beyond transactional, to have the other individuals shift into a mentality of Win-Win from Win-Lose - although, when the amount of trust is high, occasional Win-Lose can even be supported and accepted. The third dimension is Agreements: the five elements of an agreement, namely a description of the desired results, a set of guidelines, the availability of resources, accountability, and consequences, must be mutually understood so the level of success can be measured by oneself - the traditional authoritarian supervision however, is Win-Lose, where the definition of success and outcome is arbitrary, unilateral, and subjective. 

The fourth dimension is Systems. A system where people receive awards for top performance is intrinsically promoting competition across the population and most often a Win-Lose mentality; now, instead, if everyone sets their own objectives, with the mindset to beat their previous selves, this landscape can be converted to a Win-Win scenario with global improvement of performance; a proper expectation of rewards set ahead of time ensures this outcome. The problem is often not the people, but a system that encourages misaligned values. The fifth dimension is Processes. An advisable sequence involves four steps: 1) see the problem from the other point of view, 2) identify the key issues and concerns, 3) determine what results would constitute a fully acceptable solution, and 4) identify possible new options to achieve those results. 

Win-Win is a paradigm of human interaction. It comes from a character of integrity, maturity, and the Abundance Mentality. It grows out of high-trust relationships. It is embodied in agreements that effectively clarify and manage expectations as well as accomplishment. It thrives in supportive systems. Win-Win offers a centralized mentality from which interpersonal relationship should develop. 

## Part Three - Paradigms of Interdependence

Private Victory, manifested as self-mastery and self-discipline, precedes Public Victory. We desire the deep, rich and meaningful associations achieved with Interdependence, but are often frustrated with acute pains in such relationships. This acuity promotes quick fixes, but they are an outgrowth of the deeper and chronic personal problems that we have comfortably chosen to neglect: any attempt for quick fixes is no better than a mirage and offer no benefits of longevity. To understand this dynamics, we model maintenance of Interpersonal relationships as an Emotional Bank Account. 

The Emotional Bank Account is deposited into when one behaves with courtesy, kindness, honesty, and commitment, and withdrawn from when one shows discourtesy, disrespect, and ignorance. A higher trust level smoothes out communications that may otherwise be perceived as offensive, whereas an overdrawn account creates minefields where tension is high. In reality, such minefields are prevalent in marriage and organizations - any quick fixes are deceptive - it takes time, and mostly importantly, patience, proactivity, any principles, to rebuild and repair relationships. 

The Emotional Bank Account may be deposited into by 1) understanding the other individual, which takes courage as not to project our own autobiographies to others, and, by 2) attending to the minutiae, which warns us how little discourtesies, unkindness, and disrespect can quickly deteriorate the account balance because people are intrinsically sensitive, and, by 3) keep commitments and promises, since breaking them once leads to the immediate suspicion of recurrences, and, by 4) clarifying expectations, to avoid simple misunderstandings becoming compounded and later turning into personality clashes and communication breakdowns, and, by 5) showing personal integrity, which could translate to loyalty to whose who are not present, and 6) apologizing sincerely when a mistake is made - this sincerity takes courage as we too often frame our own wrong’s as others’. 

The greatest deposit into the Emotional Bank Account is unconditional love. Unconditional love is to help others feel secure, safe, validated and affirmed in their essential worth, identity, and integrity, independent of any external assessment. This ability to achieve effectiveness on one-on-one level is essential and cannot be made up with any technical administrative capacity where one labors diligently for the salvation of the masses. Any problem that we encounter in maintenance of this Emotional Bank Account create opportunities in development of production capacity. In this part, the three habits of Interdependence are examined to facilitate Public Victory. 
